---
title: 'Urban drone integration: the facility location problem'
date: 2020-01-19
tags:
  - drones
  - mathematical optimization
  - urban planning
  - data science
header:
  image: /images/urban sensing/yerevan_urban_sensing.jpg
excerpt: 'Drones, Mathematical Optimization, Data Science'
mathjax: 'true'
---

## Do cities need drones?

According to a [report](https://www.faa.gov/data_research/aviation/aerospace_forecasts/media/Unmanned_Aircraft_Systems.pdf) by the United States Federal Aviation Agency, 4.47 million small drones are expected to operate in the United States by 2021, up from today's 2.75 million. Since 2017, more than 1 million drone owners have already registered with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). So far, [as expected](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10846-017-0483-z), the main driving force behind this rapid increase in commercial drone purchases is their high mobility and applications in computer vision: taking pictures in dangerous areas, building inspection, traffic monitoring, photogammetry, etc. 
However, **this is just the beginning**. Drones are expected to carry out important tasks in future cities: They will provide a bird's eye view from the sky reporting in no time if a bridge is about to collapse, a fire is spreading or a human being is in trouble. They will [supplement our transport systems](https://www.nesta.org.uk/report/flying-high-challenge-future-of-drone-technology-in-uk-cities/exploring-urban-drone-integration/) by moving things around or getting someone somewhere quickly. In fact, [Amazon's Prime Air](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amazon_Prime_Air) drone delivery service is already in its final development stage before beginning operations. Drones will also be robots on wings, performing such tasks as repairing bridges or fighting fires.
In this post, we will discuss how drones will affect cities, and how urban planners will have to extend their scope of expertise to be able to deal with urban airspace, urban air traffic, and its interplay with traditional urban space. We will do this by solving the problem of the efficient placement of drone stations in a city and seeing how different urban air traffic configurations lead affect operation zones. 

### What should urban planners watch out for

So far, most of us see drones only occasionally. But what will happen when swarms of drones flood our cities? We can confidently expect the deployment of drones at scale to pose some significant challenges to planning, managing, and designing sustainable cities. For instance, the cost of privately owning drones can be [considerably more expensive compared to renting them](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8288882), especially for companies who may only require drones for a single task. However, with a city-wide rental system in place, the city, companies, and users will not be required to purchase drones effectively distributing the cost amongst them. Therefore, planning a drone rental service based on a system of drone ports (or stations) distributed in the city is necessary. By providing a public drone rental service of distributed autonomous drones waiting at drone ports, this can reduce the total number of drones in the sky and the total cost of utilizing drones to complete tasks requested by the city services, citizens, and other users.


## The facility location problem


<details>
  <summary>Click to expand!</summary>
  
  ## Heading
  1. A numbered
  2. list
     * With some
     * Sub bullets
</details>
